Team 5 EDA Final
================

# New York City

## Introduction to New York City


![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-12-1.png)<!-- -->

For the other cities we choose to the surrounding areas as it can be
hard to break up the city itself into very distinct areas. However, New
York city is a bit odd in this respect because it so easily is broken up
into the five borrows. These five boroughs have unique characteristics
that are represented similarly as suburban and other surrounding areas
would be for other major metropolitan areas. As such, we decided to opt
for looking at the education and economic opportunities exclusively
within New York City. We believe that this better represents our
motivating question because it would allow us to slice the data across
distinct axis while still retaining the heart of where is the most
opportunity.

## Livability in New York City

Life quality is in a city is an exceptionally hard thing to measure and
will tend to vary from person to person. While quality of life might
seem like an extraneous variable it is intimately linked to success even
if it is not always in an obvious manner. Unfortunately, our study is
focused more on the educational and economic indicators of success in a
city. However, the data as mentioned is still exceptionally important so
while not the main focus on the analysis it is still worth including if
for no other reason than to paint a picture of the overall understanding
of the boroughs in the city.


### Commutes and Walkability


![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-14-1.png)<!-- -->

The first part of the analysis will link the walkability. As a general
rule of thumb big cities tend to be more “walkable”. As such, it seems
there should be a direct negative relationship between the
commute\_over1hour and the walkability of the city. It seems however
that most of the boroughs in the city tend to be equally walkable and
have similar percentages of commutes over an hour.

### Green Spaces and Pollution



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-15-1.png)<!-- -->

It does seem that there also a lack of relationship between the number
of green spaces and the mean micro-particles i.e. pollution. The amount
of pollution does seem to be fairly high in all of them expect Staten
Island which consequently appears to exhibit the least amount of green
spaces. However, it is worth mentioning that might be skewed for
Manhattan due to Central Park.

### Neighborhood Population and Poverty



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-16-1.png)<!-- -->

The last factor worth examining in city life is the number of
impoverished people and the amount of housing vacancy. Here we do see a
bit more of a relationship with less poverty as a general role of them
leading to less vacancy. This should not be a surprising trend. We do
seem to see not as stark of a relationship as might be viewed in cities
with more space for houses than New York.

### Education Centers



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-17-1.png)<!-- -->

The last factor is a perfect sequeway to the topic of education. This
graph is fairly inline also with what we would expect to see which is
that as the income increases in the borough better education centers
appear.

## Education Status in New York City

### Math and Reading in Elementary School Students



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-19-1.png)<!-- -->


![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-19-2.png)<!-- -->

The first and most obvious indicator of education success is how well
elementary students are doing in a given area. This obviously hinges on
numerous factors such as teachers and income just for starters. However,
first we will want to look at the trends and correlation between the two
factors and across the two years given in our data set.

As expected, reading and math scores at the third grade level track in
nearly lockstep across all boroughs. This makes sense because most of
the students have not specialized like they will in college and the
material at this level more tests cognitive ability than skills within
that field(find citation). However, what is interesting is the
dispersion of the data of exhibits a higher variance over time. Due to
the amount of points it can be hard to see who did better, worse, or
stayed the same.



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-20-1.png)<!-- -->



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-20-2.png)<!-- -->

Given our code above the next logical step is to break out the boroughs
into more easily identifiable parts while stilling maintaining a
comparison between them. The comparison is broken up by reading and math
scores independently because those made up the axis from the above
graph. Two major facets quickly become apparent in the data. The first
is that math scores trended down over time. The other major structure
within the data is how the five boroughs faired. Manhattan was clearly
the best and the Bronx was clearly the worst from this analysis.

Moving forward we will compare Manhattan and the Bronx because of the
stark differences it should be easier to find potentially patterns that
*could* cause or represent these differences.



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-21-1.png)<!-- -->

The first and most obvious one to check is the levels of poverty
exhibited by the school. If Manhattan and the Bronx exhibit different
levels of poverty especially significant ones it could be a leading
cause in what causes the differences in math and reading ability. The
graph above which plots the frequency of which schools are afflicted
with poverty paints a clear picture that Manhattan has both less severe
poverty and less frequent poverty. However, it is possible that this
maybe has no affect on ability.


![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-22-1.png)<!-- -->



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-22-2.png)<!-- -->

This final graph for this section helps us to confirm the
**correlation** between math and reading ability. It seems like there is
a direct connection between the amount of poverty and the ability of the
students. However, further testing would need to be done to establish
causation. One thing worth noting is that it seems that being more
impoverished causes worse reading but being wealthy causes better math.
Said another way math seems to do better if you are rich and reading
seems to do worse if you are poor.

## Economic Variablity in New York City



### Median Income



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-25-1.png)<!-- -->

The first economic indicator of economic success seems pretty obvious -
the amount of money made in terms of the median. The mean is avoided
here to prevent extreme cases from driving up or down the amount. From
the graph the first two that stick out are Manhattan and the Bronx for
the opposite reasons. Manhattan seems to have more economic success and
the Bronx seems to be struggling. As the financial center of the world
it does not come as a surprise to Manhattans success. However, given the
proximity of the Bronx to Manhattan the reason for the Bronx’s struggle
is not as clear.



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-26-1.png)<!-- -->

The first factor that one could guess that would potentially drive
economic success is college degrees(add citation). As such, it does not
come as a surprise that there appears to be a nearly one to one
relationship between the two. However, what is interesting is that on
the first graph Staten Island seemed to come in second in terms of
median income but appears to have less college degrees as a percentage
than Brooklyn(look more into this). Unsurprisingly Manhattan seems to
have the most college degrees and highest financial success.



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-27-1.png)<!-- -->

What is interesting to note here is that there does not seem to be much
in the way of difference in terms of the employment rate. However, this
graph can be a bit misleading as everything seems to be high. 75%
unemployment is a very large portion of the population. To put this into
perspective, unemployment in the United States is generally around 90%.
Staten Island seems like the outliers here exhibiting a high income but
a lower rate of college degrees and employment (examine more).



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-28-1.png)<!-- -->

This is one of the most interesting graphs. It appears from this graph
that the employment rate is nearly devoid of a relationship with a
college degree expect in the extreme cases of a lack of degree. However,
it is very possible that relationship is actually inverted with the
employment generating whether someone has the opportunity to go to
college instead of the other way around.



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-29-1.png)<!-- -->

Given the relationship above it seems to make sense that perhaps is
being a high skilled worked that drives employment rate. However, that
also does not seem to be true expect again in the extreme case.



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-30-1.png)<!-- -->

However, college degrees are not the sole measure for financial
stability. There are numerous other factors like being high skilled
worker which would include things like trade school. Here you do see a
bit more of a relationship between high skill and median income though
not one as stark as having a college degree.



![](Rough_Draft_with_Code_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-31-1.png)<!-- -->

The last graph might seem like it belongs in livability which is an
argument is fairly solid. However, given that often times a house seems
to be the largest asset housing rates are also right at home in
financial success. While one might expect Manhattan to have the largest
amount of homes it is apparent this is not the case until you progress
into the super wealthy. Given the price of real estate in the city this
makes sense. The Bronx also matchs what you would expect as does Staten
Island as real estate prices drop.
